---
dg-publish: true
---


# [Geneva Conventions](./Geneva%20Conventions.md)


## [Convention (I) for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field. Geneva, 12 August 1949.](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/gci-1949?activeTab=undefined)

# [Article 3 - Conflicts not of an international character](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/gci-1949/article-3#:~:text=(1)%20Persons%20taking%20no%20active,founded%20on%20race%2C%20colour%2C%20religion)


- 
    - In the case of armed conflict not of an international character occurring in the territory of one of the High Contracting Parties, each Party to the conflict shall be bound to apply, as a minimum, the following provisions:
    - Persons taking no active part in the hostilities, including members of armed forces who have laid down their arms and those placed ' hors de combat ' by sickness, wounds, detention, or any other cause, shall in all circumstances be treated humanely, without any adverse distinction founded on race, colour, religion or faith, sex, birth or wealth, or any other similar criteria.
        - To this end, the following acts are and shall remain prohibited at any time and in any place whatsoever with respect to the above-mentioned persons:
# Prohibited ALWAYS

violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture;
taking of hostages;
outrages upon personal dignity, in particular humiliating and degrading treatment;
 the passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without previous judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted court, affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples.
 
# The wounded and sick shall be collected and cared for.
        
-  International Committee of the Red Cross other impartial humanitarian bodies, can offer its services to the Parties to the conflict.
        - The Parties to the conflict should further endeavor to bring into force, by means of special agreements, all or part of the other provisions of the present Convention.
        - The application of the preceding provisions shall not affect the legal status of the Parties to the conflict.

## [Convention (III) relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War. Geneva, 12 August 1949.](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/gciii-1949?activeTab=undefined)

- [Article 23 - Security of prisoners](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/gciii-1949/article-23)
    - No prisoner of war may at any time be sent to, or detained in areas where he may be exposed to the fire of the combat zone, nor may his presence be used to render certain points or areas immune from military operations.
    - Prisoners of war shall have shelters against air bombardment and other hazards of war, to the same extent as the local civilian population. With the exception of those engaged in the protection of their quarters against the aforesaid hazards, they may enter such shelters as soon as possible after the giving of the alarm. Any other protective measure taken in favour of the population shall also apply to them.
    - Detaining Powers shall give the Powers concerned, through the intermediary of the Protecting Powers, all useful information regarding the geographical location of prisoner of war camps.
    - Whenever military considerations permit, prisoner of war camps shall be indicated in the day-time by the letters PW or PG, placed so as to be clearly visible from the air. The Powers concerned may, however, agree upon any other system of marking. Only prisoner of war camps shall be marked as such.

## [Convention (IV) relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. Geneva, 12 August 1949.](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/gciv-1949?activeTab=undefined)

- [Article 28 - Treatment II. Danger zones](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/gciv-1949/article-28)
    - The presence of a protected person may not be used to render certain points or areas immune from military operations.

## [Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I), 8 June 1977.](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/api-1977?activeTab=undefined)

- [Article 12 - Protection of medical units](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/api-1977/article-12)
    - Medical units shall be respected and protected at all times and shall not be the object of attack.
    - Paragraph 1 shall apply to civilian medical units, provided that they:
        - belong to one of the Parties to the conflict;
        - are recognized and authorized by the competent authority of one of the Parties to the conflict; or
        - are authorized in conformity with Article [9](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/applic/ihl/ihl.nsf/9AC284404D38ED2BC1256311002AFD89/7439E453D5D867FEC12563CD0051D771), paragraph 2, of this Protocol or Article [27](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/applic/ihl/ihl.nsf/9AC284404D38ED2BC1256311002AFD89/FF365C2CD7744D1CC12563CD0051A0CF) of the First Convention.
    - The Parties to the conflict are invited to notify each other of the location of their fixed medical units. The absence of such notification shall not exempt any of the Parties from the obligation to comply with the provisions of paragraph 1.
    - Under no circumstances shall medical units be used in an attempt to shield military objectives from attack. Whenever possible, the Parties to the conflict shall ensure that medical units are so sited that attacks against military objectives do not imperil their safety.
- [Article 51 - Protection of the civilian population](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/api-1977/article-12)
    - The civilian population and individual civilians shall enjoy general protection against dangers arising from military operations. To give effect to this protection, the following rules, which are additional to other applicable rules of international law, shall be observed in all circumstances.
    - The civilian population as such, as well as individual civilians, shall not be the object of attack. Acts or threats of violence the primary purpose of which is to spread terror among the civilian population are prohibited.
    - Civilians shall enjoy the protection afforded by this Section, unless and for such time as they take a direct part in hostilities.
    - Indiscriminate attacks are prohibited. Indiscriminate attacks are:
        - those which are not directed at a specific military objective;
        - those which employ a method or means of combat which cannot be directed at a specific military objective; or
        -  those which employ a method or means of combat the effects of which cannot be limited as required by this Protocol; and consequently, in each such case, are of a nature to strike military objectives and civilians or civilian objects without distinction.
    - Among others, the following types of attacks are to be considered as indiscriminate:
        - an attack by bombardment by any methods or means which treats as a single military objective a number of clearly separated and distinct military objectives located in a city, town, village or other area containing a similar concentration of civilians or civilian objects; and
        - an attack which may be expected to cause incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians, damage to civilian objects, or a combination thereof, which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated.
    - Attacks against the civilian population or civilians by way of reprisals are prohibited.
    - The presence or movements of the civilian population or individual civilians shall not be used to render certain points or areas immune from military operations, in particular in attempts to shield military objectives from attacks or to shield, favour or impede military operations. The Parties to the conflict shall not direct the movement of the civilian population or individual civilians in order to attempt to shield military objectives from attacks or to shield military operations.
    - Any violation of these prohibitions shall not release the Parties to the conflict from their legal obligations with respect to the civilian population and civilians, including the obligation to take the precautionary measures provided for in Article [57](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/applic/ihl/ihl.nsf/9AC284404D38ED2BC1256311002AFD89/50FB5579FB098FAAC12563CD0051DD7C) .
- [Article 52 - General protection of civilian objects](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/api-1977/article-52)
    - Civilian objects shall not be the object of attack or of reprisals. Civilian objects are all objects which are not military objectives as defined in paragraph 2.
    - Attacks shall be limited strictly to military objectives. In so far as objects are concerned, military objectives are limited to those objects which by their nature, location, purpose or use make an effective contribution to military action and whose total or partial destruction, capture or neutralization, in the circumstances ruling at the time, offers a definite military advantage.
    - In case of doubt whether an object which is normally dedicated to civilian purposes, such as a place of worship, a house or other dwelling or a school, is being used to make an effective contribution to military action, it shall be presumed not to be so used.
- [Article 57 - Precautions in attack](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/api-1977/article-57)
    - In the conduct of military operations, constant care shall be taken to spare the civilian population, civilians and civilian objects.
    - With respect to attacks, the following precautions shall be taken:
        - those who plan or decide upon an attack shall:
            - do everything feasible to verify that the objectives to be attacked are neither civilians nor civilian objects and are not subject to special protection but are military objectives within the meaning of paragraph 2 of Article [52](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/applic/ihl/ihl.nsf/9AC284404D38ED2BC1256311002AFD89/F08A9BC78AE360B3C12563CD0051DCD4) and that it is not prohibited by the provisions of this Protocol to attack them;
            - take all feasible precautions in the choice of means and methods of attack with a view to avoiding, and in any event to minimizing, incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians and damage to civilian objects;
            - refrain from deciding to launch any attack which may be expected to cause incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians, damage to civilian objects, or a combination thereof, which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated;
        - an attack shall be cancelled or suspended if it becomes apparent that the objective is not a military one or is subject to special protection or that the attack may be expected to cause incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians, damage to civilian objects, or a combination thereof, which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated;
        - effective advance warning shall be given of attacks which may affect the civilian population, unless circumstances do not permit.
        - When a choice is possible between several military objectives for obtaining a similar military advantage, the objective to be selected shall be that the attack on which may be expected to cause the least danger to civilian lives and to civilian objects.
    - In the conduct of military operations at sea or in the air, each Party to the conflict shall, in conformity with its rights and duties under the rules of international law applicable in armed conflict, take all reasonable precautions to avoid losses of civilian lives and damage to civilian objects.
    - No provision of this Article may be construed as authorizing any attacks against the civilian population, civilians or civilian objects.
- [Article 58 - Precautions against the effects of attacks](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/api-1977/article-58)
    - The Parties to the conflict shall, to the maximum extent feasible:
        - without prejudice to Article [49](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/applic/ihl/ihl.nsf/9AC284404D38ED2BC1256311002AFD89/77068F12B8857C4DC12563CD0051BDB0) of the Fourth Convention, endeavour to remove the civilian population, individual civilians and civilian objects under their control from the vicinity of military objectives;
        - avoid locating military objectives within or near densely populated areas;
        - take the other necessary precautions to protect the civilian population, individual civilians and civilian objects under their control against the dangers resulting from military operations.

## [Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts (Protocol II), 8 June 1977.](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/apii-1977?activeTab=undefined)

- [Article 13 - Protection of the civilian population](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/ihl-treaties/apii-1977/article-13)
    - The civilian population and individual civilians shall enjoy general protection against the dangers arising from military operations. To give effect to this protection, the following rules shall be observed in all circumstances.
    - The civilian population as such, as well as individual civilians, shall not be the object of attack. Acts or threats of violence the primary purpose of which is to spread terror among the civilian population are prohibited.
    - Civilians shall enjoy the protection afforded by this Part, unless and for such time as they take a direct part in hostilities.

# [International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid](https://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/documents/atrocity-crimes/Doc.10_International%20Convention%20on%20the%20Suppression%20and%20Punishment%20of%20the%20Crime%20of%20Apartheid.pdf)

# [International Criminal Court](https://www.icc-cpi.int/resource-library)

## [Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court (Statute)](https://www.icc-cpi.int/sites/default/files/RS-Eng.pdf)

### Part 1. Establishment of the Court

### Part 2. Jurisdiction, Admissibility, and Applicable Law

#### Article 8 - War Crimes

1. The Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of war crimes in particular when committed as part of a plan or policy or as part of a large-scale commission of such crimes.
2. For the purpose of this Statute, "war crimes" means:
    1. (a) Grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, namely, any of the following acts against persons or property protected under the provisions of the relevant Geneva Convention:
    2. (b) Other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable in international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law, namely, any of the following acts:
        1. (xxiii) Utilizing the presence of a civilian or other protected person to render certain points, areas or military forces immune from military operations;
    3. (c) In the case of an armed conflict not of an international character, serious violations of article 3 common to the four Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, namely, any of the following acts committed against persons taking no active part in the hostilities, including members of armed forces who have laid down their arms and those placed hors de combat by sickness, wounds, detention or any other cause:
        1. (i) Violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture;

### Part 3. General Principles of Criminal Law

### Part 4. Composition and Administration of the Court

### Part 5. Investigation and Prosecution

### Part 6. The Trial

### Part 7. Penalties

### Part 8. Appeal and Revision

### Part 9. International Cooperation and Judicial Assistance

### Part 10. Enforcement

### Part 11. Assembly of States Parties

### Part 12. Financing

### Part 13. Final Clauses

## Rules of Procedure and Evidence (Rules)

## [Elements of Crimes](https://www.icc-cpi.int/sites/default/files/ElementsOfCrimesEng.pdf)

### Article 8 - War Crimes

- Introduction
    - The elements for war crimes under article 8, paragraph 2 (c) and (e), are subject to the limitations addressed in article 8, paragraph 2 (d) and (f), which are not elements of crimes.
    - The elements for war crimes under article 8, paragraph 2, of the Statute shall be interpreted within the established framework of the international law of armed conflict including, as appropriate, the international law of armed conflict applicable to armed conflict at sea.
    - With respect to the last two elements listed for each crime:
        - There is no requirement for a legal evaluation by the perpetrator as to the existence of an armed conflict or its character as international or noninternational;
        - In that context there is no requirement for awareness by the perpetrator of the facts that established the character of the conflict as international or noninternational;
        - There is only a requirement for the awareness of the factual circumstances that established the existence of an armed conflict that is implicit in the terms “took place in the context of and was associated with”.
- Article 8 (2)(b)(xxiii) - War crime of using protected persons as shields
    - Elements
        - The perpetrator moved or otherwise took advantage of the location of one or more civilians or other persons protected under the international law of armed conflict.
        - The perpetrator intended to shield a military objective from attack or shield, favour or impede military operations.
        - The conduct took place in the context of and was associated with an international armed conflict.
        - The perpetrator was aware of factual circumstances that established the existence of an armed conflict.

## Regulations of the Court

## Regulations of the Office of the Prosecutor

## Regulations of the Registry

## Code of Professional Conduct for counsel

## Code of Conduct for the Office of the Prosecutor

## Code of Judicial Ethics

# [International Humanitarian Law Database](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en)

## [Customary International Humanitarian Law](https://www.icrc.org/en/doc/assets/files/other/customary-international-humanitarian-law-ii-icrc-eng.pdf)

- [Rule 1 - The Principle of Distinction between Civilians and Combatants](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule1)
- Rule 1. The parties to the conflict must at all times distinguish between civilians and combatants. Attacks may only be directed against combatants. Attacks must not be directed against civilians.
    - Practice
        - Volume II, Chapter 1, Section A.
    - Summary
        - State practice establishes this rule as a norm of customary international law applicable in both international and non-international armed conflicts. The three components of this rule are interrelated and the practice pertaining to each of them reinforces the validity of the others. The term combatant in this rule is used in its generic meaning, indicating persons who do not enjoy the protection against attack accorded to civilians, but does not imply a right to combatant status or prisoner-of-war status (see Chapter 33).This rule has to be read in conjunction with the prohibition to attack persons recognized to be _hors de combat_ (see Rule 47) and with the rule that civilians are protected against attack unless and for such time as they take a direct part in hostilities (see Rule 6). Belligerent reprisals against civilians are discussed in Chapter 41.
    - International armed conflicts
        - The principle of distinction between civilians and combatants was first set forth in the St. Petersburg Declaration, which states that “the only legitimate object which States should endeavour to accomplish during war is to weaken the military forces of the enemy”. The Hague Regulations do not as such specify that a distinction must be made between civilians and combatants, but Article 25, which prohibits “the attack or bombardment, by whatever means, of towns, villages, dwellings, or buildings which are undefended”, is based on this principle. The principle of distinction is now codified in [Articles](./Articles.md) 48, 51(2) and 52(2) of Additional Protocol I, to which no reservations have been made. According to Additional Protocol I, “attacks” means “acts of violence against the adversary, whether in offence or in defence”. At the Diplomatic Conference leading to the adoption of the Additional Protocols, Mexico stated that [Articles](./Articles.md) 51 and 52 of Additional Protocol I were so essential that they “cannot be the subject of any reservations whatsoever since these would be inconsistent with the aim and purpose of Protocol I and undermine its basis”. Also at the Diplomatic Conference, the United Kingdom stated that Article 51(2) was a “valuable reaffirmation” of an existing rule of customary international law. The prohibition on directing attacks against civilians is also laid down in Protocol II, Amended Protocol II and Protocol III to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and in the Ottawa Convention banning anti-personnel landmines. In addition, under the Statute of the International Criminal Court, “intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities” constitutes a war crime in international armed conflicts. Numerous military manuals, including those of States not, or not at the time, party to Additional Protocol I, stipulate that a distinction must be made between civilians and combatants and that it is prohibited to direct attacks against civilians. Sweden’s IHL Manual identifies the principle of distinction as laid down in Article 48 of Additional Protocol I as a rule of customary international law. In addition, there are numerous examples of national legislation which make it a criminal offence to direct attacks against civilians, including the legislation of States not, or not at the time, party to Additional Protocol I. In the _Kassem case_ in 1969, [Israel](./Israel.md)’s Military Court at Ramallah recognized the immunity of civilians from direct attack as one of the basic rules of international humanitarian law. There are, moreover, many official statements which invoke the rule, including by States not, or not at the time, party to Additional Protocol I. The rule has also been invoked by parties to Additional Protocol I against non-parties. In their pleadings before the International Court of Justice in the _Nuclear Weapons case_, many States invoked the principle of distinction. In its advisory opinion in the _Nuclear Weapons case_, the Court stated that the principle of distinction was one of the “cardinal principles” of international humanitarian law and one of the “intransgressible principles of international customary law”. When the ICRC appealed to the parties to the conflict in the Middle East in October 1973, i.e., before the adoption of Additional Protocol I, to respect the distinction between combatants and civilians, the States concerned (Egypt, Iraq, [Israel](./Israel.md) and Syria) replied favourably.
    - Non-international armed conflicts
        - Article 13(2) of Additional Protocol II prohibits making the civilian population as such, as well as individual civilians, the object of attack. The prohibition on directing attacks against civilians is also contained in Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. It is also set forth in Protocol III to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, which has been made applicable in non-international armed conflicts pursuant to an amendment of Article 1 of the Convention adopted by consensus in 2001. The Ottawa Convention banning anti-personnel landmines states that the Convention is based, inter alia, on “the principle that a distinction must be made between civilians and combatants”. Under the Statute of the International Criminal Court, “intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities” constitutes a war crime in non-international armed conflicts. In addition, this rule is included in other instruments pertaining also to non-international armed conflicts. Military manuals which are applicable in or have been applied in non-international armed conflicts specify that a distinction must be made between combatants and civilians to the effect that only the former may be targeted. To direct attacks against civilians in any armed conflict is an offence under the legislation of numerous States. There are also a number of official statements pertaining to non-international armed conflicts invoking the principle of distinction and condemning attacks directed against civilians. States’ submissions to the International Court of Justice in the Nuclear Weapons case referred to above were couched in general terms applicable in all armed conflicts. No official contrary practice was found with respect to either international or non-international armed conflicts. This rule is sometimes expressed in other terms, in particular as the principle of distinction between combatants and non-combatants, whereby civilians who do not take a direct part in hostilities are included in the category of non-combatants. Alleged violations of this rule have generally been condemned by States, irrespective of whether the conflict was international or non-international. Similarly, the UN Security Council has condemned or called for an end to alleged attacks against civilians in the context of numerous conflicts, both international and non-international, including in Afghanistan, Angola, Azerbaijan, Burundi, Georgia, Lebanon, Liberia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslavia and the territories occupied by [Israel](./Israel.md). As early as 1938, the Assembly of the League of Nations stated that “the intentional bombing of civilian populations is illegal”. The 20th International Conference of the Red Cross in 1965 solemnly declared that governments and other authorities responsible for action in all armed conflicts should conform to the prohibition on launching attacks against a civilian population. Subsequently, a UN General Assembly resolution on respect for human rights in armed conflicts, adopted in 1968, declared the principle of distinction to be applicable in all armed conflicts. The Plan of Action for the years 2000–2003, adopted by the 27th International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent in 1999, requires that all parties to an armed conflict respect “the total ban on directing attacks against the civilian population as such or against civilians not taking a direct part in hostilities”. In a resolution adopted in 2000 on protection of civilians in armed conflicts, the UN Security Council reaffirmed its strong condemnation of the deliberate targeting of civilians in all situations of armed conflict. The jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice in the Nuclear Weapons case, of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, in particular in the Tadić case, Martić case and Kupreškić case, and of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in the case relative to the events at La Tablada in Argentina provides further evidence that the obligation to make a distinction between civilians and combatants is customary in both international and non-international armed conflicts. The ICRC has called on parties to both international and non-international armed conflicts to respect the distinction between combatants and civilians.
- [Rule 6 - Civilians’ Loss of Protection from Attack](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule6)
- Rule 6. Civilians are protected against attack, unless and for such time as they take a direct part in hostilities.
    - Practice
        - Volume II, Chapter 1, Section F.
    - Summary
        - State practice establishes this rule as a norm of customary international law applicable in both international and non-international armed conflicts. The use of human shields is the subject of Rule 97.
    - International armed conflicts
        - The rule whereby civilians lose their protection against attack when and for such time as they take a direct part in hostilities is contained in Article 51(3) of Additional Protocol I, to which no reservations have been made. At the Diplomatic Conference leading to the adoption of the Additional Protocols, Mexico stated that Article 51 of Additional Protocol I was so essential that it “cannot be the subject of any reservations whatsoever since these would be inconsistent with the aim and purpose of Protocol I and undermine its basis”. Also at the Diplomatic Conference, the United Kingdom stated that the exception to the civilian immunity from attack contained in Article 51(3) was a “valuable reaffirmation” of an existing rule of customary international law. Upon ratification of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, the United Kingdom declared that civilians enjoyed the protection of the Convention “unless and for such time as they take a direct part in hostilities”.
        - Numerous military manuals state that civilians are not protected against attack when they take a direct part in hostilities. The rule is supported by official statements and reported practice. This practice includes that of States not, or not at the time, party to Additional Protocol I. When the ICRC appealed to the parties to the conflict in the Middle East in October 1973, i.e., before the adoption of Additional Protocol I, to respect civilian immunity from attack, unless and for such time as they took a direct part in hostilities, the States concerned (Egypt, Iraq, [Israel](./Israel.md) and Syria) replied favourably.
    - Non-international armed conflicts
        - Pursuant to Article 13(3) of Additional Protocol II, civilians are immune from direct attack “unless and for such time as they take a direct part in hostilities”. In addition, this rule is set forth in other instruments pertaining also to non-international armed conflicts.
        - The rule that civilians are not protected against attack when they take a direct part in hostilities is included in many military manuals which are applicable in or have been applied in non-international armed conflicts.
        - In the case concerning the events at La Tablada in Argentina, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights held that civilians who directly take part in fighting, whether singly or as members of a group, thereby become legitimate military targets but only for such time as they actively participate in combat.
        - To the extent that members of armed opposition groups can be considered civilians (see commentary to Rule 5), this rule appears to create an imbalance between such groups and governmental armed forces. Application of this rule would imply that an attack on members of armed opposition groups is only lawful for "such time as they take a direct part in hostilities" while an attack on members of governmental armed forces would be lawful at any time. Such imbalance would not exist if members of armed opposition groups were, due to their membership, either considered to be continuously taking a direct part in hostilities or not considered to be civilians.
        - It is clear that the lawfulness of an attack on a civilian depends on what exactly constitutes direct participation in hostilities and, related thereto, when direct participation begins and when it ends. As explained below, the meaning of direct participation in hostilities has not yet been clarified. It should be noted, however, that whatever meaning is given to these terms, immunity from attack does not imply immunity from arrest and prosecution.
    - Definition
        - A precise definition of the term “direct participation in hostilities” does not exist. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights has stated that the term “direct participation in hostilities” is generally understood to mean “acts which, by their nature or purpose, are intended to cause actual harm to enemy personnel and matériel”. Loss of protection against attack is clear and uncontested, as evidenced by several military manuals, when a civilian uses weapons or other means to commit acts of violence against human or material enemy forces.But there is also a lot of practice which gives little or no guidance on the interpretation of the term “direct participation”, stating, for example, that the assessment of direct participation has to be made on a case-by-case basis or simply repeating the general rule that direct participation causes civilians to lose protection against attack. The military manuals of Ecuador and the United States give several examples of acts constituting direct participation in hostilities, such as serving as guards, intelligence agents or lookouts on behalf of military forces. The Report on the Practice of the Philippines similarly considers that civilians acting as spies, couriers or lookouts lose their protection against attack.
        - In a report on human rights in Colombia, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights sought to distinguish “direct” from “indirect” participation:
            - Civilians whose activities merely support the adverse party’s war or military effort or otherwise only indirectly participate in hostilities cannot on these grounds alone be considered combatants. This is because indirect participation, such as selling goods to one or more of the armed parties, expressing sympathy for the cause of one of the parties or, even more clearly, failing to act to prevent an incursion by one of the armed parties, does not involve acts of violence which pose an immediate threat of actual harm to the adverse party.
        - The distinction between direct and indirect participation had previously been developed by the Special Representative of the UN Commission on Human Rights for El Salvador. It is clear, however, that international law does not prohibit States from adopting legislation that makes it a punishable offence for anyone to participate in hostilities, whether directly or indirectly.
        - The Report on the Practice of Rwanda makes a distinction between acts that constitute direct participation in international and non-international armed conflicts and excludes logistical support in non-international armed conflicts from acts that constitute direct participation. According to the responses of Rwandan army officers to a questionnaire referred to in the report, unarmed civilians who follow their armed forces during an international armed conflict in order to provide them with food, transport munitions or carry messages, for example, lose their status as civilians. In the context of a non-international armed conflict, however, unarmed civilians who collaborate with one of the parties to the conflict always remain civilians. According to the report, this distinction is justified by the fact that in internal armed conflicts civilians are forced to cooperate with the party that holds them in its power.
        - It is fair to conclude, however, that outside the few uncontested examples cited above, in particular use of weapons or other means to commit acts of violence against human or material enemy forces, a clear and uniform definition of direct participation in hostilities has not been developed in State practice.
        - Several military manuals specify that civilians working in military objectives, for example, munitions factories, do not participate directly in hostilities but must assume the risks involved in an attack on that military objective. The injuries or death caused to such civilians are considered incidental to an attack upon a legitimate target which must be minimized by taking all feasible precautions in the choice of means and methods, for example, by attacking at night (see Rule 17). The theory that such persons must be considered quasi-combatants, liable to attack, finds no support in modern State practice.
    - Situations of doubt as to the character of a person
        - The issue of how to classify a person in case of doubt is complex and difficult. In the case of international armed conflicts, Additional Protocol I has sought to resolve this issue by stating that “in case of doubt whether a person is a civilian, that person shall be considered to be a civilian”. Some States have written this rule into their military manuals. Others have expressed reservations about the military ramifications of a strict interpretation of such a rule. In particular, upon ratification of Additional Protocol I, France and the United Kingdom expressed their understanding that this presumption does not override commanders’ duty to protect the safety of troops under their command or to preserve their military situation, in conformity with other provisions of Additional Protocol I. The US Naval Handbook states that:
            - Direct participation in hostilities must be judged on a case-by-case basis. Combatants in the field must make an honest determination as to whether a particular civilian is or is not subject to deliberate attack based on the person’s behavior, location and attire, and other information available at the time.
        - In the light of the foregoing, it is fair to conclude that when there is a situation of doubt, a careful assessment has to be made under the conditions and restraints governing a particular situation as to whether there are sufficient indications to warrant an attack. One cannot automatically attack anyone who might appear dubious.
        - In the case of non-international armed conflicts, the issue of doubt has hardly been addressed in State practice, even though a clear rule on this subject would be desirable as it would enhance the protection of the civilian population against attack. In this respect, the same balanced approach as described above with respect to international armed conflicts seems justified in non-international armed conflicts.
- [Rule 14 - Proportionality in Attack](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14)
- Rule 14. Launching an attack which may be expected to cause incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians, damage to civilian objects, or a combination thereof, which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated, is prohibited.
    - Practice
        - Volume II, Chapter 4.
    - Summary
        - State practice establishes this rule as a norm of customary international law applicable in both international and non-international armed conflicts.
    - International armed conflicts
        - The principle of proportionality in attack is codified in Article 51(5)(b) of Additional Protocol I, and repeated in Article 57.[1](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00001) At the Diplomatic Conference leading to the adoption of the Additional Protocols, France voted against Article 51 because it deemed that paragraph 5 by its “very complexity would seriously hamper the conduct of defensive military operations against an invader and prejudice the inherent right of legitimate defence”.[2](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00002) Upon ratification of Additional Protocol I, however, France did not enter a reservation to this provision. At the Diplomatic Conference leading to the adoption of the Additional Protocols, Mexico stated that Article 51 was so essential that it “cannot be the subject of any reservations whatsoever since these would be inconsistent with the aim and purpose of Protocol I and undermine its basis”.[3](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00003) Also at the Diplomatic Conference, several States expressed the view that the principle of proportionality contained a danger for the protection of the civilian population but did not indicate an alternative solution to deal with the issue of incidental damage from attacks on lawful targets.[4](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00004) The United Kingdom stated that Article 51(5)(b) was “a useful codification of a concept that was rapidly becoming accepted by all States as an important principle of international law relating to armed conflict”.[5](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00005)
        - The principle of proportionality in attack is also contained in Protocol II and Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons.[6](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00006) In addition, under the Statute of the International Criminal Court, “intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects … which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated” constitutes a war crime in international armed conflicts.[7](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00007)
        - A large number of military manuals lay down the principle of proportionality in attack.[8](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00008) Sweden’s IHL Manual, in particular, identifies the principle of proportionality as set out in Article 51(5) of Additional Protocol I as a rule of customary international law.[9](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00009) Numerous States have adopted legislation making it an offence to carry out an attack which violates the principle of proportionality.[10](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00010)This rule is supported by official statements.[11](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00011) This practice includes that of States not, or not at the time, party to Additional Protocol I.[12](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00012) When the ICRC appealed to the parties to the conflict in the Middle East in October 1973, i.e., before the adoption of Additional Protocol I, to respect the principle of proportionality in attack, the States concerned (Egypt, Iraq, Israel and Syrian Arab Republic) replied favourably.[13](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00013)
        - In their submissions to the International Court of Justice in the _Nuclear Weapons case_ and _Nuclear Weapons (WHO) case_, numerous States, including States not, or not at the time, party to Additional Protocol I, invoked the principle of proportionality in their assessments of whether an attack with nuclear weapons would violate international humanitarian law.[14](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00014) In its advisory opinion, the Court acknowledged the applicability of the principle of proportionality, stating that “respect for the environment is one of the elements that go to assessing whether an action is in conformity with the principles of necessity and proportionality”.[15](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00015)
    - Non-international armed conflicts
        - While Additional Protocol II does not contain an explicit reference to the principle of proportionality in attack, it has been argued that it is inherent in the principle of humanity which was explicitly made applicable to the Protocol in its preamble and that, as a result, the principle of proportionality cannot be ignored in the application of the Protocol.[16](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00016) The principle has been included in more recent treaty law applicable in non-international armed conflicts, namely Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons.[17](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00017) In addition, it is included in other instruments pertaining also to non-international armed conflicts.[18](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00018)
        - Military manuals which are applicable in or have been applied in non-international armed conflicts specify the principle of proportionality in attack.[19](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00019) Many States have adopted legislation making it an offence to violate the principle of proportionality in attack in any armed conflict.[20](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00020) In the _Military Junta case_ in 1985, the National Appeals Court of Argentina considered the principle of proportionality in attack to be part of customary international law.[21](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00021) There are also a number of official statements pertaining to armed conflicts in general or to non-international armed conflicts in particular that refer to this rule.[22](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00022) The pleadings of States before the International Court of Justice in the _Nuclear Weapons case_ referred to above were couched in general terms applicable in all armed conflicts.
        - The jurisprudence of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and a report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights provide further evidence of the customary nature of this rule in non-international armed conflicts.[23](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00023)
        - No official contrary practice was found with respect to either international or non-international armed conflicts. Alleged violations of the principle of proportionality in attack have generally been condemned by States.[24](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00024) The United Nations and other international organizations have also condemned such violations, for example, in the context of the conflicts in Chechnya, Kosovo, the Middle East and the former Yugoslavia.[25](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00025)
        - The ICRC has reminded parties to both international and non-international armed conflicts of their duty to respect the principle of proportionality in attack.[26](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00026)
    - Interpretation
        - Several States have stated that the expression “military advantage” refers to the advantage anticipated from the military attack considered as a whole and not only from isolated or particular parts of that attack.[27](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00027) The relevant provision in the Statute of the International Criminal Court refers to the civilian injuries, loss of life or damage being excessive “in relation to the concrete and direct _overall_ military advantage anticipated” (emphasis added).[28](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00028) The ICRC stated at the Rome Conference on the Statute of the International Criminal Court that the addition of the word “overall” to the definition of the crime could not be interpreted as changing existing law.[29](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00029) Australia, Canada and New Zealand have stated that the term “military advantage” includes the security of the attacking forces.[30](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00030)
        - Upon ratification of Additional Protocol I, Australia and New Zealand stated that they interpreted the term “concrete and direct military advantage anticipated” as meaning that there is a _bona fide_ expectation that the attack would make a relevant and proportional contribution to the objective of the military attack involved.[31](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00031)According to the Commentary on the Additional Protocols, the expression “concrete and direct” military advantage was used in order to indicate that the advantage must be “substantial and relatively close, and that advantages which are hardly perceptible and those which would only appear in the long term should be disregarded”.[32](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00032)
        - Numerous States have pointed out that those responsible for planning, deciding upon or executing attacks necessarily have to reach their decisions on the basis of their assessment of the information from all sources which is available to them at the relevant time.[33](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule14#Fn_BA32BB92_00033) These statements were generally made with reference to Articles 51–58 of Additional Protocol I, without excluding their application to the customary rule.
- [Rule 22 - Principle of Precautions against the Effects of Attacks](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule22)
- Rule 22. The parties to the conflict must take all feasible precautions to protect the civilian population and civilian objects under their control against the effects of attacks.
    - Practice
        - Volume II, Chapter 6, Section A.
    - Summary
        - State practice establishes this rule as a norm of customary international law applicable in both international and non-international armed conflicts. This is a basic rule to which more content is given by the specific obligations contained in Rules 23–24. The practice collected in terms of those specific obligations is also relevant to prove the existence of this rule and vice versa.
    - International armed conflicts
        - The duty of each party to the conflict to take all feasible precautions to protect the civilian population and civilian objects under its control against the effects of attacks is set forth in Article 58(c) of Additional Protocol I, to which no reservations have been made.
        - Numerous military manuals restate the duty of parties to the conflict to take all feasible precautions to protect the civilian population and civilian objects under their control against the effects of attacks. This obligation is supported by official statements and reported practice. This practice includes that of States not, or not at the time, party to Additional Protocol I.
    - Non-international armed conflicts
        - The obligation to take all feasible precautions to protect the civilian population and civilian objects against the effects of attacks was included in the draft of Additional Protocol II but was dropped at the last moment as part of a package aimed at the adoption of a simplified text. As a result, Additional Protocol II does not explicitly require precautions against the effects of attack. Article 13(1) requires that “the civilian population and individual civilians shall enjoy general protection against the dangers arising from military operations”. It would be difficult to comply with this requirement without taking precautions against the effects of attack. The requirement to take precautions against the effects of attacks has, moreover, been included in more recent treaty law applicable in non-international armed conflicts, namely the Second Protocol to the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property. In addition, this rule is contained in other instruments pertaining also to non-international armed conflicts.
        - Military manuals which are applicable in or have been applied in non-international armed conflicts specify the requirement to take precautions against the effects of attacks. It is supported by reported practice.
        - In 1965, the 20th International Conference of the Red Cross adopted a resolution calling on governments and other authorities responsible for action in all armed conflicts to spare the civilian population as much as possible. This was reaffirmed by the UN General Assembly in a resolution on respect for human rights in armed conflict adopted in 1968. In addition, in a resolution adopted in 1970 on basic principles for the protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts, the UN General Assembly required that “in the conduct of military operations, every effort should be made to spare civilian populations from the ravages of war, and all necessary precautions should be taken to avoid injury, loss or damage to civilian populations”.
        - The jurisprudence of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in the Kupreškić case provides further evidence of the customary nature of the requirement to take precautions against the effects of attacks in both international and non-international armed conflicts. In its judgment, the Tribunal considered that this rule was customary because it specified and fleshed out general pre-existing norms. It can be argued indeed that the principle of distinction (see Rules 1 and 7), which is customary in international and non-international armed conflicts, inherently requires respect for this rule. The Tribunal also relied on the fact that this rule had not been contested by any State. This study found no official contrary practice either.
        - This practice should be read together with the extensive practice on the prohibition of the use of human shields (see Rule 97). The deliberate violation of the obligation to take all feasible precautions against the effects of attacks is often related to the use of human shields. In addition, international case-law has confirmed the obligation under international human rights law to take positive steps to protect life (see commentary to Rule 97).
    - Examples of precautions against the effects of attacks
        - Specific examples of how the general obligation to take precautions against the effects of attacks has been implemented include first and foremost the two specific obligations identified in Rules 23 and 24 below.
        - In addition, practice has shown that the construction of shelters, digging of trenches, distribution of information and warnings, withdrawal of the civilian population to safe places, direction of traffic, guarding of civilian property and the mobilization of civil defence organizations are measures that can be taken to spare the civilian population and civilian objects under the control of a party to the conflict.
    - Feasibility of precautions against the effects of attack
        - The obligation to take precautions against the effects of attacks “to the extent feasible” has been interpreted by many States as meaning that the obligation is limited to those precautions which are practicable or practically possible, taking into account all circumstances ruling at the time, including humanitarian and military considerations. The Rapporteur of the Working Group at the Diplomatic Conference leading to the adoption of the Additional Protocols reported that after the phrase “to the maximum extent feasible” had been introduced to qualify all subparagraphs of Article 58, agreement was quickly reached. According to the Rapporteur, this revision reflected the concern of small and densely populated countries which would find it difficult to separate civilians and civilian objects from military objectives and that even large countries would find such separation difficult or impossible to arrange in many cases. Upon ratification of Additional Protocol I, Austria and Switzerland stated that the obligation would be applied subject to the requirements of the defence of the national territory.
        - State practice indicates that an attacker is not prevented from attacking military objectives if the defender fails to take appropriate precautions or deliberately uses civilians to shield military operations. The attacker remains bound in all circumstances, however, to take appropriate precautions in attack (see Rule 15) and must respect the principle of proportionality (see Rule 14) even though the defender violates international humanitarian law.
    - Information required for deciding upon precautions against the effects of attack
        - Numerous States have indicated that military commanders have to reach decisions concerning the taking of precautions against the effects of attack on the basis of their assessment of the information from all sources which is available to them at the relevant time.
- [Rule 23. Location of Military Objectives outside Densely Populated Areas](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule23)
- Rule 23. Each party to the conflict must, to the extent feasible, avoid locating military objectives within or near densely populated areas.
    - Practice
        - Volume II, Chapter 6, Section B.
    - Summary
        - State practice establishes this rule as a norm of customary international law applicable in international, and arguably also in non-international, armed conflicts. This rule is an application of the principle of distinction (see Rules 1 and 7). It is also related to the prohibition of human shields (see Rule 97), as everything feasible must be done to separate military objectives from the civilian population, but in no event may civilians be used to shield military objectives.
    - International armed conflicts
        - The duty of each party to the conflict to avoid locating military objectives within or near densely populated areas is set forth in Article 58(b) of Additional Protocol I, to which no reservations relevant to this rule have been made. It is also contained in the Israel-Lebanon Ceasefire Understanding of 1996.
        - A large number of military manuals include this obligation. It is also supported by official statements and reported practice. This practice includes that of States not, or not at the time, party to Additional Protocol I.
    - Non-international armed conflicts
        - Although Additional Protocol II does not explicitly require precautions against the effects of attacks, Article 13(1) stipulates that “the civilian population and individual civilians shall enjoy general protection against the dangers arising from military operations” and it would be difficult to afford such protection when military objectives are located within or near densely populated areas. The requirement to take this precaution against the effects of attacks has, moreover, been included in more recent treaty law applicable in non-international armed conflicts, namely the Second Protocol to the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property. In addition, this rule is contained in other instruments pertaining also to non-international armed conflicts.
        - Military manuals which are applicable in or have been applied in non-international armed conflicts specify the duty of each party to the conflict to avoid locating military objectives within or near densely populated areas.
        - The jurisprudence of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in the Kupreškić case provides further evidence of the customary nature of the duty of each party to the conflict to avoid locating military objectives within or near densely populated areas in both international and non-international armed conflicts. In its judgment, the Tribunal considered that this rule was customary because it specified and fleshed out general pre-existing norms. It can be argued indeed that the principle of distinction (see Rules 1 and 7) and the principle of proportionality (see Rule 14), which are both customary in international and non-international armed conflicts, inherently require respect for this rule. The Tribunal also relied on the fact that this rule had not been contested by any State. This study found no official contrary practice either.
        - In 1979, in the context of the conflict in Rhodesia/Zimbabwe, the ICRC appealed to the Patriotic Front to “clearly separate civilian establishments, particularly refugee camps, from military installations”.
        - The rules which require that persons deprived of their liberty be held in premises which are removed from the combat zone (see Rule 121) and that in case of displacement all possible measures be taken in order that the civilian population may be received under satisfactory conditions of safety (see Rule 131), which are both applicable in international and non-international armed conflicts, are also relevant in establishing the customary nature of this rule.
    - Interpretation
        - While some practice refers to the duty to locate military bases and installations outside densely populated areas, practice in general limits this obligation to what is feasible. It is possible, as several reports on State practice point out, that demographic changes cause military bases to be located within or near cities where this was originally not the case. When such objectives involve immovable property, it is less feasible to move them than in the case of movable property. At the Diplomatic Conference leading to the adoption of the Additional Protocols, South Korea stated that this rule “does not constitute a restriction on a State’s military installations on its own territory”. Dual use installations, such as railway stations and airports, may even be located near or inside densely populated areas on purpose.
- [Rule 80 - Booby-Traps](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule80)
- Rule 80. The use of booby-traps which are in any way attached to or associated with objects or persons entitled to special protection under international humanitarian law or with objects that are likely to attract civilians is prohibited.
    - Practice
        - Volume II, Chapter 28.
    - Summary
        - State practice establishes this rule as a norm of customary international law applicable in both international and non-international armed conflicts.
    - International armed conflicts
        - Both treaty practice and other State practice support the premise that booby-traps are prohibited if, by their nature or employment, their use violates the legal protection accorded to a protected person or object by another customary rule of international humanitarian law. This is the reasoning behind the list of booby-traps prohibited in Protocol II and Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons.
        - The list of booby-traps prohibited by Protocol II and Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons is found in the military manuals and legislation of some States party to these treaties. Other military manuals are more general in their description and stress that booby-traps associated with objects in normal civilian daily use are prohibited, and that booby-traps must not be used in association with protected persons, protected objects (such as medical supplies, gravesites and cultural or religious property) or internationally recognized protective emblems or signs (such as the red cross and red crescent). Several manuals further specify that booby-traps must not be used in connection with certain objects likely to attract civilians, such as children’s toys. These prohibitions are also to be found in the military manuals and statements of States not, or not at the time, party to Protocol II or Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons.
    - Non-international armed conflicts
        - The premise behind the prohibitions of the use of certain kinds of booby-traps or the use of booby-traps in certain situations during international armed conflicts is equally valid for non-international armed conflicts. Furthermore, during the discussions on the extension of the applicability of Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons to non-international armed conflicts, the application of the Protocol’s provisions on booby-traps to such conflicts was uncontested. Although the discussions took place in the context of treaty negotiations, they indicate that States considered it pertinent that civilians and objects protected by the rules of international humanitarian law applicable in non-international armed conflicts should equally be protected against booby-traps that would have the effect of violating those rules.
        - In addition, the regulation of booby-traps is also contained in military manuals and national legislation applicable in non-international armed conflicts. Colombia’s Constitutional Court has held that the prohibition of certain booby-traps in non-international armed conflicts is part of customary international law.
    - Use of other booby-traps
        - Booby-traps which are used in a way not prohibited by the current rule are still subject to the general rules on the conduct of hostilities, in particular the principle of distinction (see Rules 1 and 7) and the principle of proportionality (see Rule 14). In addition, the rule that all feasible precautions must be taken to avoid, and in any event to minimize, incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians and damage to civilian objects (see Rule 15) must also be respected.
- [Rule 81 - Restrictions on the Use of Landmines](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule81)
- Rule 81. When landmines are used, particular care must be taken to minimize their indiscriminate effects.
    - Practice
        - Volume II, Chapter 29, Section B.
    - Summary
        - State practice establishes this rule as a norm of customary international law applicable in both international and non-international armed conflicts. This rule applies to the use of anti-vehicle mines. It also applies in relation to anti-personnel landmines for States which have not yet adopted a total ban on their use.
    - International armed conflicts
        - Many of the rules in both the original and amended versions of Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, as well as other State practice, are aimed at obviating the indiscriminate effects of mines. The provisions of these treaties, which include the prohibitions of certain types of mines as well as further limitations, are specifically aimed at limiting the potentially indiscriminate damage caused by these weapons. Furthermore, practice shows that the customary rules applying to the conduct of hostilities, such as the principle of distinction (see Rules 1 and 7), the principle of proportionality (see Rule 14) and the obligation to take all feasible precautions in attack (see Rule 15), are equally applicable to the use of landmines.
        - The obligation to take particular care when using landmines is based on a number of rules that have been codified in Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. This Protocol sets out general rules on the emplacement of all landmines. It also outlines specific restrictions on the use of remotely delivered landmines and non-remotely delivered landmines used in populated areas. In addition, the Protocol requires that all feasible precautions be taken to protect civilians from the effects of these weapons. The Protocol also refers to special precautionary measures such as marking and signposting of minefields, recording minefields, monitoring minefields and procedures to protect UN forces and missions. Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons was adopted by consensus and was not controversial at the time.
        - Many military manuals set forth special precautionary measures to be taken when using landmines. There are also indications that the provisions of Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons are considered to constitute an authoritative minimum standard in relation to the use of landmines which are not specifically prohibited under treaty obligations, as are anti-personnel landmines under the Ottawa Convention on Anti-Personnel Mines. As a result, these precautionary measures as a whole provide an indication of the types of measures States believe must be taken to minimize the indiscriminate effects of landmines.
        - Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons reaffirms and develops the precautionary measures to be taken when using landmines.
    - Non-international armed conflicts
        - The original Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons was only applicable in international armed conflicts, and physical practice in internal conflicts has for the most part not been consistent with these rules. However, the concern shown by the UN Security Council, UN General Assembly and individual States about the effects of landmines on civilians in non-international armed conflicts is an indication of the international community’s view that civilians must be protected from mines in such situations. The extension of the scope of application of Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons to non-international armed conflicts reflects this view. Since then, the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons itself has been amended so that the original Protocol II is also applicable in non-international armed conflicts for States adhering to the amended Convention. The amendment, adopted at the Second Review Conference in 2001, was not controversial. Hence, there is a strong case for the existence of a customary rule in non-international armed conflicts that mines must not be used in ways that amount to indiscriminate attacks and that particular care must therefore be taken to minimize their indiscriminate effects.
    - Anti-personnel landmines
        - With over 140 ratifications of the Ottawa Convention on Anti-Personnel Mines, and others on the way, the majority of States are treaty-bound no longer to use, produce, stockpile and transfer anti-personnel landmines. However, several States, including China, Finland, India, Republic of Korea, Pakistan, Russian Federation and the United States, have not ratified the Ottawa Convention on Anti-Personnel Mines and maintain that they are still entitled to use anti-personnel landmines. About a dozen non-party States have used anti-personnel mines in recent conflicts. This practice means that it cannot be said at this stage that the use of anti-personnel landmines is prohibited under customary international law.
        - However, almost all States, including those that are not party to the Ottawa Convention on Anti-Personnel Mines and are not in favour of their immediate ban, have agreed that they need to work towards the eventual elimination of anti-personnel landmines. Particularly noteworthy is the Final Declaration adopted by consensus by States party to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons at the Second Review Conference in 2001, including by a number of States not party to the Ottawa Convention on Anti-Personnel Mines. In the Declaration, the States parties “solemnly declare … their conviction that all States should strive towards the goal of the eventual elimination of anti-personnel landmines globally”. In addition, a number of UN General Assembly resolutions have urged States to contribute to the elimination of anti-personnel landmines. Although there were some abstentions to these resolutions, the majority of abstaining States have since joined the Declaration adopted at the Second Review Conference or have made statements recognizing the goal of the eventual elimination of anti-personnel mines, in particular Ethiopia in 1995 and Turkey in 2002 (which has now also ratified the Ottawa Convention on Anti-Personnel Mines). Resolutions adopted by the OIC Conference of Ministers of Foreign Affairs in 1995 and 1996 and by the 26th International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent in 1995 also support the eventual elimination of anti-personnel landmines. It is particularly noteworthy that, at their First Meeting in Maputo in 1999, States party to the Ottawa Convention on Anti-Personnel Mines adopted a Declaration calling upon States still using or possessing anti-personnel landmines to “cease now” from so doing. Such a statement to non-party States is a significant indication of the belief that all States should work towards the elimination of anti-personnel mines. All the practice cited above appears to indicate that an obligation to eliminate anti-personnel landmines is emerging.
- [Rule 97 - Human Shields](https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/customary-ihl/v1/rule97#refFn_C7C1EC06_00009)
- Rule 97. The use of human shields is prohibited.
    - Practice
        - Volume II, Chapter 32, Section J.
    - Summary
        - State practice establishes this rule as a norm of customary international law applicable in both international and non-international armed conflicts.
    - International and non-international armed conflicts
        - In the context of international armed conflicts, this rule is set forth in the Third Geneva Convention (with respect to prisoners of war), the Fourth Geneva Convention (with respect to protected civilians) and Additional Protocol I (with respect to civilians in general). Under the Statute of the International Criminal Court, “utilizing the presence of a civilian or other protected person to render certain points, areas or military forces immune from military operations” constitutes a war crime in international armed conflicts
        - The prohibition of using human shields is contained in numerous military manuals, many of which extend the prohibition to all civilians. Using human shields constitutes a criminal offence under the legislation of many States. This practice includes that of States not, or not at the time, party to Additional Protocol I or to the Statute of the International Criminal Court. In 1990 and 1991, there was extensive condemnation by States of the use of prisoners of war and civilians by Iraq as human shields, and the United States declared that such use amounted to a war crime. The use of prisoners of war as human shields during the Second World War was the subject of war crimes trials by the UK Military Court at Lüneberg in the _Student case_ in 1946 and by the US Military Tribunal at Nuremberg in the _Von Leeb (The High Command Trial) case_ in 1948. In the _Karadžić and Mladić case_ in 1995 before the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, the accused were charged with war crimes for using UN peacekeepers as human shields. In its review of the indictments the Tribunal upheld this charge.
        - With respect to non-international armed conflicts, Additional Protocol II does not explicitly mention the use of human shields, but such practice would be prohibited by the requirement that “the civilian population and individual civilians shall enjoy general protection against the dangers arising from military operations”. It is significant, furthermore, that the use of human shields has often been equated with the taking of hostages, which is prohibited by Additional Protocol II, and by customary international law (see Rule 96). In addition, deliberately using civilians to shield military operations is contrary to the principle of distinction and violates the obligation to take feasible precautions to separate civilians and military objectives (see Rules 23–24).
        - Several military manuals which apply in non-international armed conflicts prohibit the use of human shields. The legislation of several States criminalizes the use of human shields in non-international armed conflicts. The use of human shields in non-international armed conflicts has been condemned by States and by the United Nations, for example, with respect to the conflicts in Liberia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Tajikistan and the former Yugoslavia.
        - No official contrary practice was found.
        - The ICRC has reminded parties to both international and non-international armed conflicts of the prohibition of using human shields.
        - International human rights law does not prohibit the use of human shields as such, but this practice would constitute, among other things, a violation of the non-derogable right not to be arbitrarily deprived of the right to life (see commentary to Rule 89). The UN Human Rights Committee and regional human rights bodies have indicated that this right involves not only the right not to be killed, but also the duty of States to take measures to protect life. In Demiray v. Turkey, in which the applicant submitted that her husband had been used as a human shield, the European Court of Human Rights stated that “Article 2 may … imply in certain well-defined circumstances a positive obligation on the authorities to take preventive operational measures to protect an individual for which they are responsible”.
    - Definition of human shields
        - The prohibition of using human shields in the Geneva Conventions, Additional Protocol I and the Statute of the International Criminal Court are couched in terms of using the presence (or movements) of civilians or other protected persons to render certain points or areas (or military forces) immune from military operations. Most examples given in military manuals, or which have been the object of condemnations, have been cases where persons were actually taken to military objectives in order to shield those objectives from attacks. The military manuals of New Zealand and the United Kingdom give as examples the placing of persons in or next to ammunition trains. There were many condemnations of the threat by Iraq to round up and place prisoners of war and civilians in strategic sites and around military defence points. Other condemnations on the basis of this prohibition related to rounding up civilians and putting them in front of military units in the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia and Liberia.
        - In the Review of the Indictments in the _Karadžić and Mladić case_, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia qualified physically securing or otherwise holding peacekeeping forces against their will at potential NATO air targets, including ammunition bunkers, a radar site and a communications centre, as using “human shields”.
        - It can be concluded that the use of human shields requires an intentional co-location of military objectives and civilians or persons _hors de combat_ with the specific intent of trying to prevent the targeting of those military objectives.

# General notes

Addressing the legality of a blockade

- Three Sources of International Law
    - Treaties
        - Agreements ratified between two or more countries.
    - Customary Law
        - A group of people across time engage in a practice that is not codified into law, essentially common law?
        - They do this because they have a subjective belief that this is compulsory
    - General Principles
        - The permanent court of international justice in the league of nations was the first international court
    - Case laws by international courts and writing by international publicists
- Big International Courts
    - lol there's a lot
- Who even has jurisdiction?
    - Considerations
        - Applicable Law
            - What pieces of international law are applicable to this situation?
        - Jurisdiction
            - What courts can decide whether a law has been broken or not?
    - ICJ or the ICC
        - ICC litigates between individuals and the ICJ litigates between countries
    - The ICC - In Hague
        - The ICC recognizes essentially four crimes
            - Genocide
                - Intentional destruction of a group of people.
            - Crimes against humanity
                - Widespread or criminal activity by a _de facto_ authority that grossly violate humans, usually by or on behalf of a state.
                    - Includes things like apartheid
            - War crimes
                - Essentially referencing the Geneva Conventions.
            - Crimes of aggression
                - Aggressive or large-scale act of aggression using state military force, holds accountable leaders of war.
        - People or nationals who are signatories to the Rome Statue of the ICC are capable of bringing cases to this court.
    - The ICJ
        - Random Facts
            - Exists under the UN, if you become a member of the UN, you automatically a member of this court.
            - Litigates issues between nations.
        - Jurisdictions
            - Three ways to establish jurisdictions
                - Special agreement
                    - Two states go before the court and sign a special agreement for the purpose of the court having jurisdiction.
                        - Not valid if...
                            - Coercion exists, corruption exists, bribery, etc...
                            - Imperative law could be violated, meaning some international norm or law is violated.
                            - Incompatibility with other agreement
                - Compromissory clause
                    - The parties can bring something to the ICJ if there's a violation to another treaty.
                - Optional clause declaration
                    - Article 38 says states can make unilateral declaration allowing anyone to submit cases to them against the ICJ.
                        - This is subject to reciprocity, for this clause
                        - States can carve out exceptions relating to other issues, say the law of the sea

## Articles

[https://international-review.icrc.org/sites/default/files/irrc_866_9.pdf](https://international-review.icrc.org/sites/default/files/irrc_866_9.pdf)  
[https://legal.un.org/ilc/texts/instruments/english/draft_articles/9_6_2001.pdf](https://legal.un.org/ilc/texts/instruments/english/draft_articles/9_6_2001.pdf)  
_uti possidetis juris_  
jus in bellum  
jus ad bello